In the last video, we
introduced the Extended
Kalman Filter,
which uses
local linearization
as a way to allow us to
apply the Kalman
filter equations
to non-linear systems.
In this video, we're
going to look
at a variant of
the EKF called the
Error-State Extended
Kalman Filter,
or ES-EKF, which
has a couple of
nice properties that will
come in handy later
in the course.
By the end of this video,
you'll be able to describe
the error state
formulation
of the Extended
Kalman Filter,
and describe the
advantages of
the error state EKF
over the vanilla
EKF that you learned
about in the
previous video.
The idea behind
the error state EKF
is really very simple.
We're going to
start thinking
about our vehicle state,
x, as being composed
of two parts;
a large part called
the nominal state, x hat,
and a small part called
the error state, Delta x.
We can think of
a simple example of
tracking the position
of a car over time.
The green line shows
the true position
of the car,
which is the quantity
we're trying to estimate.
The red line is
the nominal state,
or our best guess what
the true state could
be based on what
we know about the
car's motion model and
acceleration and
breaking inputs.
Of course,
our motion model
is never perfect,
and there is always
some random process noise.
These errors build up over
time as we integrate
the motion model.
We can think of
the error state
as the place where all of
these modelling errors and
process noise
accumulate over time,
so that the error state
is just the
difference between
the nominal state and
the true state at
any given time.
If we can figure out what
the error state is,
we can actually use
it as a correction to
the nominal state to bring
us closer to
the true state.
So, in the error
state EKF,
instead of doing
Kalman filtering on
the full state
which might have
lots of complicated
non-linear behaviors,
we're going to
use the EKF to
estimate the error
state instead,
and then use
the estimate of
the error state as
a correction to
the nominal state.
What this means
mathematically
is that we're going to
rearrange our
linearized motion
model so that we now
have an equation
that can tell us how
the difference between
the true state at time,
k, and our predicted
state at time, k,
is related to
the same difference
at time, k minus one.
These differences
are exactly
the error states we
just talked about;
Delta x sub k and
Delta x sub k minus one,
and the equations
relating them are
called the error
state kinematics.
We can also re-express
our linearized
measurement model in
terms of the error
state directly.
We can use this error
state formulation of
the EKF in
a very similar way
to the vanilla EKF.
We start off by updating
the nominal state using
the non-linear
motion model
and our current best
estimate of the state.
We could do this a bunch
of times before ever
getting a measurement
for the correction step.
So, the current
best estimate
might be x check or x hat.
We also need to keep track
of the state covariance,
which grows as
we integrate
more and more
process noise
from the motion model.
Note that again,
the previous
covariance estimate
could be P check
or P hat depending
on whether we
used a measurement to
do a correction step.
We can repeat the loop
updating the
nominal state and
the error state covariance
for as long as we like
until we receive
the measurement
and want to do
a correction.
When this happens,
we can compute
the Kalman gain as usual,
and then compute
the best estimate of
the error state using
the Kalman gain,
the measurement, and
our nonlinear
measurement model.
Now,
here's where things
are little different.
Once we have
an estimate for
the mean of
the error state,
we want to use
this to update
the nominal state and
correct the error.
We can do that by just
adding our estimate
of the error state to
the nominal state to get
the correct state estimate
for the full state.
Finally, we can update
the state covariance using
the usual equations.
That's it.
This process
goes on forever,
or at least until
the vehicle runs
out of gas.
So, why would we
actually want to use
the error state EKF
in practice?
Well, there are two
good reasons to use it.
One reason is that
it can often work
better than the
vanilla EKF because
the small error
state is more
amenable to
linear filtering
than the large
nominal state,
which we can integrate
non-linearly.
The other reason is that
the error state
formulation makes it much
easier to work with
constrained quantities
like rotations, which
will come in handy a
bit later in the course.
The reason for
this is that we
don't necessarily
have to use
plane vector addition to
break down the state.
In fact, we could use
any generalized
composition operation
we like as long as it
gives us a consistent way
of incorporating
small perturbations
into the nominal state.
If this all sounds
a bit abstract
right now, don't worry.
Later in the
course, we'll use
the error state
EKF to help
us deal with rotations
in 3D space,
which are
a very common type
of constraint quantity.
Let's recap. The error
state formulation
of the EKF separates
the vehicle state into
a large nominal state
and a small error state.
The nominal state
keeps track of what
the motion model predicts
the states should be,
while the error state
captures the
modelling errors and
process noise that
accumulate over time.
In the error state EKF,
we estimate
this small error state
and use it as
a correction to
the nominal state.
This is the main
difference between
the error state EKF
and the vanilla EKF,
which estimates
the full state.
Keep in mind that
both formulations
still rely on
local linearization.
The error state
EKF has a couple
of advantages over
the vanilla EKF.
The first is that
it simply performs
better because
the evolution
of the error state tends
to be closer to linear.
The other is that
the error state
formulation
makes it easier to handle
special quantities
like 3D rotations
as we'll see later
in the course.
In the next video,
we'll discuss some of
the shortcomings
of the EKF,
and how local
linearization
can break down creating
a potentially
dangerous situation
for a self-driving car.